[doc][tune] Add tune checkpoint user guide. (#33145)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/tune/tutorials/tune-trial-checkpoint.rst

.. _tune-trial-checkpoint:

Trial Checkpoint Saving and loading
===================================

Tune supports both :ref:`class trainable and functional trainable APIs <tune_60_seconds_trainables>`.
We will go through how trial checkpoint works separately for each of the sections below.

.. _tune-function-trainable-checkpointing:

Function API Checkpointing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For function API, one can save and load checkpoints in Ray Tune in the following manner:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trainable.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_start__
    :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_end__

.. note:: ``checkpoint_frequency`` and ``checkpoint_at_end`` will not work with Function API checkpointing.

In this example, checkpoints will be saved by training iteration to ``<local_dir>/<exp_name>/trial_name/checkpoint_<step>``.

Tune also may copy or move checkpoints during the course of tuning. For this purpose,

> it is important not to depend on absolute paths in the implementation of ``save``.

Author: actually I think this sentence is not relevant anymore. So removing it.

every *N* iterations and recover from up to *M* crashes per trial, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    tuner = tune.Tuner(
        my_trainable,
        run_config=air.RunConfig(
            checkpoint_config=air.CheckpointConfig(checkpoint_frequency=10),
            failure_config=air.FailureConfig(max_failures=5))
    )
    results = tuner.fit()

**Checkpointing at Termination**: The checkpoint_frequency may not coincide with the exact end of an experiment.
If you want a checkpoint to be created at the end of a trial, you can additionally set the ``checkpoint_at_end=True``:

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 5

    tuner = tune.Tuner(
        my_trainable,
        run_config=air.RunConfig(
            checkpoint_config=air.CheckpointConfig(checkpoint_frequency=10, checkpoint_at_end=True),
            failure_config=air.FailureConfig(max_failures=5))
    )
    results = tuner.fit()

Use ``validate_save_restore`` to catch ``save_checkpoint``/``load_checkpoint`` errors before execution.

.. code-block:: python

    from ray.tune.utils import validate_save_restore

    # both of these should return
    validate_save_restore(MyTrainableClass)

>     validate_save_restore(MyTrainableClass, use_object_store=True)

Author: removed this as I don't even use it myself.

Configurations
==============
Checkpointing can be configured through :class:`CheckpointConfig <ray.air.config.CheckpointConfig>`.
Some of the options may not apply to Function Trainable. See table below.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * -
     - Function API
     - Class API
   * - ``num_to_keep``
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
   * - ``checkpoint_score_attribute``
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
   * - ``checkpoint_score_order``
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
   * - ``checkpoint_frequency``
     - |:heavy_multiplication_x:|
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|
   * - ``checkpoint_at_end``
     - |:heavy_multiplication_x:|
     - |:heavy_check_mark:|

> See also
> ========
> :ref:`Storage configuration guide <tune-storage-options>`
> :ref:`Running Distributed Experiments with Ray Tune <tune-distributed-ref>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary
=======

In this user guide, we covered how to save and load trial checkpoints in Tune.
Once checkpointing has been enabled, move onto one of the following guides to find out how to:

- :ref:`Extract checkpoints from Tune experiment results <>` --> link to https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/tune/examples/tune_analyze_results.html
- :ref:`Configure persistent storage options` for a :ref:`distributed Tune experiment <tune-distributed-ref>`
- Perform batch prediction or serving --> link to AIR user guides
```

Author: decided that batch prediction/serving not that related to this added. but added the other two.

.. _tune-trial-checkpoint:

How to Save and Load Trial Checkpoints
======================================

> Trial checkpoint is one of :ref:`the three types of data stored by Tune <tune-persisted-experiment-data>`.
> These are user-defined and are meant to snapshot your training progress!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trial checkpoints are one of :ref:`the three types of data stored by Tune <tune-persisted-experiment-data>`.
These are user-defined and are meant to snapshot your training progress!
```

> Trial-level checkpoints are saved via the :ref:`Tune Trainable <tune-60-seconds>` API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trial-level checkpoints are saved via the :ref:`Tune Trainable <tune-60-seconds>` API: this is how you define your custom training logic, and it's also where you'll define what trial state to checkpoint.
```

(Checkpoint a directory).

.. TODO(ml-team): https://github.com/ray-project/ray/issues/33251
.. warning:: When using ``from_directory``, the content of the checkpoint will be copied and moved
    to a tune managed folder (<trial_name>/checkpoint_<epoch>). This may cause some inefficiency when
    checkpoint is synced to driver node or the cloud. We are planning to work on it to address the
    issue.

.. tabbed:: Checkpoint a dictionary

    .. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_start__
        :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_end__

.. tabbed:: Checkpoint a directory

    .. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_from_dir_start__
        :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_from_dir_end__

In the above code snippet:

- We implement *checkpoint saving* with :meth:`session.report(..., checkpoint=checkpoint) <ray.air.session.report>`. Note that every checkpoint must be reported alongside a set of metrics -- this way, checkpoints can be ordered with respect to a specified metric.

> - The saved checkpoint during training iteration `step` is saved to the path ``<local_dir>/<exp_name>/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>`` on the node on which training happens and can be further synced to a consolidated storage location depending on the :ref:`storage configuration <tune-storage-options>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The saved checkpoint during training iteration `epoch` is saved to the path ``<local_dir>/<exp_name>/<trial_name>/checkpoint_<epoch>`` on the node on which training happens and can be further synced to a consolidated storage location depending on the :ref:`storage configuration <tune-storage-options>`.
```

- We implement *checkpoint loading* with :meth:`session.get_checkpoint() <ray.air.session.get_checkpoint>`. This will be populated with a trial's latest checkpoint whenever Tune restores a trial. This happens when (1) a trial is configured to retry after encountering a failure, (2) the experiment is being restored, and (3) the trial is being resumed after a pause (ex: :doc:`PBT </tune/examples/pbt_guide>`).

  .. TODO: for (1), link to tune fault tolerance guide. For (2), link to tune restore guide.

.. note::
    ``checkpoint_frequency`` and ``checkpoint_at_end`` will not work with Function API checkpointing.
    These are configured manually with Function Trainable. For example, if you want to checkpoint every three
    epochs, you can do so through:

    .. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_periodic_start__
        :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_periodic_end__

See :ref:`here for more information on creating checkpoints <air-checkpoint-ref>`.
If using framework-specific trainers from Ray AIR, see :ref:`here <air-trainer-ref>` for

> references to framework-specific checkpoints such as `TensorflowCheckpoint`.

Reviewer: Let's make this a `.. seealso::` and swap the location with the warning above.

swap with this warning: `When using ``from_directory``, the content of the checkpoint...`

.. _tune-class-trainable-checkpointing:

Class API Checkpointing
-----------------------

You can also implement checkpoint/restore using the Trainable Class API:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __class_api_checkpointing_start__
    :end-before: __class_api_checkpointing_end__

You can checkpoint with three different mechanisms: manually, periodically, and at termination.

Manual Checkpointing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A custom Trainable can manually trigger checkpointing by returning ``should_checkpoint: True``
(or ``tune.result.SHOULD_CHECKPOINT: True``) in the result dictionary of `step`.
This can be especially helpful in spot instances:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __class_api_manual_checkpointing_start__
    :end-before: __class_api_manual_checkpointing_end__

In the above example, if ``detect_instance_preemption`` returns True, manual checkpointing can be triggered.

Periodic Checkpointing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Periodic checkpointing can be used to provide fault-tolerance for experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> This can be enabled by setting ``checkpoint_frequency=<int>`` and ``max_failures=<int>`` to checkpoint trials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be enabled by setting ``checkpoint_frequency=N`` to checkpoint trials
```

> every *N* iterations and recover from up to *M* crashes per trial, e.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
every *N* iterations, e.g.:
```

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __class_api_periodic_checkpointing_start__
    :end-before: __class_api_periodic_checkpointing_end__

Checkpointing at Termination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The checkpoint_frequency may not coincide with the exact end of an experiment.
If you want a checkpoint to be created at the end of a trial, you can additionally set the ``checkpoint_at_end=True``:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __class_api_end_checkpointing_start__
    :end-before: __class_api_end_checkpointing_end__

> Configurations
> --------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tune Checkpointing Configurations
---------------------------------
```

> Checkpointing can be configured through :class:`CheckpointConfig <ray.air.config.CheckpointConfig>`.

Reviewer: Add a quick example:

For example, the example below will save only the best checkpoint per trial, as determined by largest custom `score` metric that gets reported:

```python
from ray import tune
from ray.air import Checkpoint, CheckpointConfig, RunConfig, session

def train_fn(config):
    for i in range(1, config["num_epochs"] + 1):
        metrics = {"score": i}
        session.report(metrics, checkpoint=Checkpoint.from_dict(metrics))

tuner = tune.Tuner(
    train_fn,
    param_space={"num_epochs": 10},
    run_config=RunConfig(
        checkpoint_config=CheckpointConfig(
            num_to_keep=1,
            checkpoint_score_attribute="score",
            checkpoint_score_order="max"
        )
    ),
)
```

metadata pertaining to each trial (e.g., hyperparameter configuration, some derived trial results
(min, max, last), etc).

The experiment-level checkpoint is periodically saved by the driver on the head node.
By default, the frequency at which it is saved is automatically
adjusted so that at most 5% of the time is spent saving experiment checkpoints,
and the remaining time is used for handling training results and scheduling.
This time can also be adjusted with the
:ref:`TUNE_GLOBAL_CHECKPOINT_S environment variable <tune-env-vars>`.

Trial Checkpoints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Trial-level checkpoints capture the per-trial state. This often includes the model and optimizer states.
Following are a few uses of trial checkpoints:

- If the trial is interrupted for some reason (e.g., on spot instances), it can be resumed from the last state. No training time is lost.
- Some searchers or schedulers pause trials to free up resources for other trials to train in the meantime. This only makes sense if the trials can then continue training from the latest state.
- The checkpoint can be later used for other downstream tasks like batch inference.

> Learn saving and loading trial checkpoints here: :ref:`here <tune-trial-checkpoint>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn how to save and load trial checkpoints :ref:`here <tune-trial-checkpoint>`.
```

Trial Results
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Metrics reported by trials are saved and logged to their respective trial directories.

> This is the data stored in CSV, JSON or Tensorboard (events.out.tfevents.*) formats.
> that can be inspected by Tensorboard and used for post-experiment analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the data stored in CSV, JSON or Tensorboard (events.out.tfevents.*) formats that can be inspected by Tensorboard and used for post-experiment analysis.
```

When training models with Tune, you can snapshot training progress with **checkpoints**,
which often includes the model and optimizer states of each trial. At the end of the experiment,
you can then use the checkpoint that corresponds with the best hyperparameter configuration.

Here are a few other uses of trial checkpoints:
- If the trial is interrupted for some reason (e.g., on spot instances), it can be resumed from the latest state -- no training time is lost.
- Some searchers or schedulers pause trials to free up resources for other trials to train. This only makes sense if the trials checkpoint before pausing, and then continue training from their latest state.
- The checkpoint is an output of the Tune experiment that can be used for other downstream tasks like finetuning on a different task, batch inference, and serving.

Trial-level checkpoints are saved via the [Tune Trainable](tune-60-seconds-trainables) API.
In this guide, we will show how to save and load checkpoints for Tune's Function Trainable and Class Trainable APIs,
as well as walk you through configuration options.

How to Save and Load Trial Checkpoint

> =====================================

Author: Moved to the top, but still prefer to make it clear in the title.

.. _tune-function-trainable-checkpointing:

Function API Checkpointing
--------------------------

If using Ray Tune's Function API, one can save and load checkpoints in the following manner:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_start__

>     :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_end__

Reviewer: Can we do a tabbed example? And then bring the other example from below?

```
.. tabbed:: Checkpoint a dictionary

    ...

.. tabbed:: Checkpoint a directory

    ...
```

    epochs, you can do so through:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_periodic_start__
    :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_periodic_end__

See :ref:`here for more information on creating checkpoints <air-checkpoint-ref>`.
If using framework-specific trainers from Ray AIR, see :ref:`here <air-trainer-ref>` for
references to framework-specific checkpoints such as `TensorflowCheckpoint`.

To create an AIR checkpoint, one can either use :meth:`~ray.air.checkpoint.Checkpoint.from_dict`
(above example) or :meth:`~ray.air.checkpoint.Checkpoint.from_directory` APIs (below example).

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __function_api_checkpointing_from_dir_start__
    :end-before: __function_api_checkpointing_from_dir_end__

.. warning:: When using ``from_directory``, the content of the checkpoint will be copied and moved
    to a tune managed folder (<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>). This may cause some inefficiency when
    checkpoint is synced to driver node or the cloud. We are planning to work on it to address the

>     issue.

Reviewer: ```rst
.. TODO(ml-team): <Link a tracker issue>

.. warning::

    When using ``Checkpoint.from_directory``, the contents of the checkpoint will be copied and moved
    to a Tune managed folder ``<trial_name>/checkpoint_<step>``.
```

    :end-before: __class_api_periodic_checkpointing_end__

Checkpointing at Termination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The checkpoint_frequency may not coincide with the exact end of an experiment.
If you want a checkpoint to be created at the end of a trial, you can additionally set the ``checkpoint_at_end=True``:

.. literalinclude:: /tune/doc_code/trial_checkpoint.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __class_api_end_checkpointing_start__
    :end-before: __class_api_end_checkpointing_end__

Configurations
==============
Checkpointing can be configured through :class:`CheckpointConfig <ray.air.config.CheckpointConfig>`.
Some of the configurations do not apply to Function Trainable API, since checkpointing frequency
is determined manually within the user-defined training loop. See the compatibility matrix below.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * -
     - Function API
     - Class API
   * - ``num_to_keep``
     - ✅
     - ✅
   * - ``checkpoint_score_attribute``
     - ✅
     - ✅
   * - ``checkpoint_score_order``
     - ✅
     - ✅
   * - ``checkpoint_frequency``
     - ✅
     - ❌
   * - ``checkpoint_at_end``
     - ✅

>      - ❌

Author: good catch!

Summary
=======

In this user guide, we covered how to save and load trial checkpoints in Tune. Once checkpointing is enabled,
move onto one of the following guides to  find out how to:

- :doc:`Extract checkpoints from Tune experiment results </tune/examples/tune_analyze_results>`
- :ref:`Configure persistent storage options <tune-storage-options>` for a :ref:`distributed Tune experiment <tune-distributed-ref>`

.. _tune-persisted-experiment-data:

Appendix - Types of data stored by Tune

> =======================================

Reviewer: Make this smaller than title
```
-----
```

Reviewer: Then, need to bump the ones below down too
